You were saying that this chart was reasonably
accurate. I think all those charts are as good as
you can put them together. Okay, so those could go
in the front of the interviews then, and that would
explain about where we feel like everyone may
happen to be. Now then, the next thing is that you
were going to say something about a British team
also being involved. Yes, the British had, and
particularly the people from Imperial Chemical
Industry and the oil industry of Great Britain,
they had teams over there too. Now, these were
headed, if I remember, by Gordon. Kenneth Gordon,
who was a very good personal friend of mine. He
loved sailing, and I was doing a lot of sailing
about that time. And Kenneth Gordon and I became
very good close friends, as a matter of fact. And
Kenneth Gordon was the man who first allowed us to
go through Imperial Comfort Industries' coal
hydrogenation plant when Storch and I went over
there. I see. And there was another man by the name
of Halroyd. I've forgotten Halroyd's first name.
H.H. Storch. Anyway, Howell Road was a very
important contributor to the knowledge in the
British team. The British teams did not have as
many people over there as we did, but I bet they had
half as many. They were very, very knowledgeable
people, too. Mr. Gordon put out the Gordon Report.
which the British government then published
about perhaps the size of it. I think I have a copy of
that here. That's a very high item. That took us
months to locate. Did it? Oh, these things are very
difficult. I think I have a copy of Kenneth's
report. I have some of the copies of the old chaos
reports and so on, so the ones I'm particularly
interested in. Of course, of course. I couldn't
keep them all. I had a whole wall covered with these
things, but as the years went by, I had to discard
some of them, and I did. Now, two or three other
things came along of importance with this. As we
investigated both the fissure tropes and the coal
hydrogenation processes and became acquainted
with the German people who were the top echelon in
the development of the processes and the
operation of the plants and so on and so forth,
particularly
the group in the Bureau of Mines became very much
interested in bringing German scientists back to
this country. And the oil companies were
interested too. And so the Army at that time was
developing a means whereby we could contract with
those people to bring them over to this country. So
we brought over Donath, who was one of the best
chemists in the coal hydrogenation work. And he
was Pierre's assistant. And we brought over
Alberts, who was Alberts and Pickler, who were
very, Alberts had done most of the work in
developing the plants, the Fischer-Tropsch
plants in Germany. Pickler had done a lot of the
research work in Germany. We brought over
Hoobman, who was one of their best gasification
people. And I guess we brought over four or five
other people, and some of them whose names have
sort of escaped my memory. We're talking about
something that happened 20 or 25 years ago, so
they've sort of escaped my mind. I can't even
recall what I had for breakfast this morning. Yes.
But anyway, and one of the things that you might be
interested in is that The German technology for
the production of oxygen in large quantities for
these plants was... Hydrogen. Oxygen. For
gasification and things like that was
considerably advanced over our own technology.
And after I got back and we began to develop
Louisiana, Missouri, we wanted an oxygen plant
to... run our copper-stoxic gasifier. Now, this
is a way of making hydrogen, but you use oxygen
along the way. And we had, in our work over there,
had come on, had investigated a small oxygen
plant, about a ton an hour plant. It was at Hakes,
H-O-E-C-H-S-T, I think, outside of Frankfurt.
And we got the idea that maybe the best way for us to
get a small oxygen plant over here would be to go
over and see if the Germans would pack that up and
ship it to us. And Joe Daugherty, who was then my
assistant in synthetic fuels, went over there,
and he talked to Clay about it. And Clay said, well,
he thought they could get it arranged. Remember,
General Clay was in charge of the occupation for
some time after Lucius Clay. I was trying to
remember his first name. You've got it, Lucius
Clay. And the Germans agreed with that. They were
not using the plant, and they packed it up very
beautifully and numbered all the parts and gave us
the drawings and so on and so forth. And while Joe
Doherty was over there getting this all arranged,
I got the idea, well, maybe we ought to bring back a
few Germans to help us put the plant together. So we
got two of the workmen who were skilled in building
these plants and two of the engineers, and we
brought them over here. And we erected the plant in
Louisiana, Missouri. And it worked beautifully.
It was always a joy to me that we, the plant was not in
use, and it was something that we could use very
much. And we did run it for months at Louisiana,
Missouri. And in a way, I think that started a much
larger expansion of the volume oxygen production
here in the United States. The Germans were way
ahead of us on that. on that fitness. Now, the
Louisiana, Missouri plant was taken over by
Bechtel, or didn't Bechtel have a hand in... No,
Bechtel built the Louisiana, Missouri plant, of
course. I see, I see. Now, let me get at what
happened in the Jura mines after this
investigation. See, this was all going on just as
we were beginning to start our investigation on a
bigger scale on synthetic fuels as a result of the
act of Congress, the Synthetic Liquid Fuel Act.
And so we were very anxious, of course, to bring
back as much information about how to build a
fair-sized coal hydrogenation and fisheries
plant as we possibly could. So these reports had
specific and direct and immediate application as
soon as we got back to the United States, as far as
our own work at Louisiana, Missouri was
concerned. So what we set out to do at Louisiana,
Missouri, was to design a coal hydrogenation
plant fairly much after the German technology, to
produce about 200 barrels a day and to test
American coals in this coal-hygienation plant.
And we hired the Bechtel Corporation as the
engineering corporation who would help assist us
in designing and building this plant. Now, this is
where Bechtel came into the picture. And as I told
you, we had brought back
several of the German engineers. including
Donath. And they worked at Louisiana, Missouri
with Bechtel and with our engineers to design this
plant. And we ran that plant then through the late
40s and through the early 50s, testing about five
or six American coals in it and getting the
operation of the plant smoothed out and so on and so
forth. And as a matter of fact,
I think one of the first uses for synthetic fuels is
that on our inauguration program for that plant,
I'm not sure it was the inauguration program or
whether it was somewhat later, we ran a diesel
engine train from St. Louis to Louisiana,
Missouri with a lot of oil people on synthetic fuel
that was pulled out there by synthetic fuels.
That plant ran until about 1953. We also build a
fissure tropics plant out there. Now, the fissure
tropics, I don't know whether you're familiar
with thinking about this process or not, but the
fissure tropics is a two-step process. You make CO
and hydrogen from coal with steam, coal, and
oxygen. And then the CO and hydrogen are combined
to make liquid fuels.
You probably will get yourself saturated in this
technology, even though you're a historian
before you're through with this thing. And we
build about 50 barrel a day of fissure tropics
plants out there. Now, this has to be done under
very high pressure at very high temperatures.
Well, the coal hydrogenation plant is a very high
pressure plant running anywhere from, I'd say,
about 3,000 to 10,000 pounds per square inch. The
fissure tropics is not a high pressure plant. Your
highest pressures are around 500 pounds per
square inch. But very high temperature as well.
Not neither is it what we call extremely high
temperature. The fasciotropes plant would run
around, oh, I'd say around 600, 700 degrees
Fahrenheit, and the co-hygienation plants
around 900 degrees Fahrenheit. Now, those are not
real high temperatures. Those are temperatures
that go a day. As far as catalysts, did you require a
cobalt or a nickel-thiesel or a thorium? The
catalyst picture is very complex. You can...
cobalt, molybdenum, tungsten, thorium, things
like that, are excellent catalysts for coal
hydrogenation. Strike that thorium out, that's a
catalyst. But iron is a catalyst for coal
hydrogenation. So there's a lot of catalysts. And
the coal hydrogenation process, you really also
have a two-step process in that you hydrogenate
the coal in one step. And this produces some
distillable oils that are comparable to a
synthetic crude, but it also produces some heavy
oils. And you recycle the heavy oils back through
the process. Now, in Germany, in general, all of
this distillable oil was rehydrogenated again to
make final products. In the Fischer-Tropsch
process, after you have made the gases C on
hydrogen and then made your gasoline, your final
step is usually simply a refining or distillation
step to separate it out into the various products
that you want. Now, the Fischer-Tropsch process
will make anything from a very light
gasoline-like product to a fairly heavy oil. The
coal hydrogenation will also make light products
to heavy products, but it also makes a good
high-octane gasoline. The aromatic content,
which comes from the coal itself, the coal
structure, tends to make a better product for
gasoline than the Fischer-Tropsch product does.
The Fischer-Tropsch product is better for such
oils as diesel oils and things of that nature.
Now, we came back to Louisiana, Missouri with all
of this data and built the plants and ultimately
ran the plants for a number of years.
By this time, we were getting into the early 1950s.
We hired, oh, by the way, I should mention to you
that on the fish tropes plant at Louisiana,
Missouri, the design and construction of that
plant was by Coppers and Company of this country.
Of this country? Yeah, this country. We brought
Totsik over here to help us design and build and
erect the Totsik gas fire. Now, he was from Coppers
of Germany. Okay. I didn't know that we had an
American...
Well, coppers of this kind, you must not say that.
So they're a big company. As a historian, I
wouldn't. Yes, coppers of this kind. And both
Bechtel and coppers did a wonderful job for us.
They were tremendously interested in the whole
project, and they did a wonderful job for us. Now,
let me go on with this a little bit more. Because
we're going to come to the meat of this thing right
now. At the end of the
late 40s and early 50s, we had quite a lot of data and
knew quite a lot about these operations. And so the
next thing was, let's find out what the economics
is. I mean, after all, it does come down to $1. and
sense propositions. And this is the problem that
always faces synthetic fuels or synthetic gas. As
you know, you don't want to pay $4 a thousand for the
gas going into your house. I mean, your heating
bill goes from $40 a month to $200 a month, and
you're unhappy as hell, if I may use that
expression on your record. And the same thing is
true of liquid fuels. I mean, if you have to have a
plant which is enormously capital costly and
which takes a lot of men to run and everything,
you're going to have a very expensive product. So
we hired Bechtel, and working with our own
engineers, we sat down and made a study of what we
could conceive in 1950 to be the best and the most
economical coal hydrogenation plant we could
build.
And whereas at that time a refinery ran around
$1,000 to $2,000 per barrel per day of production,
these plants turned out to be about $12,000 or
$13,000 per barrel per day of production. And the
cost of the product at the refinery, gasoline at
the refinery, was then selling for about 10 or 11
cents a gallon, and the cost of gasoline from a coal
hydrogenation plant was in the order of 30 or 35
cents a gallon.
So... That's the bottom line. That's the bottom
line, and so you had to say to yourself, but this
didn't look like a very economic process. And this
was the best we could conceive. We had, in fact,
increased the thermal efficiency of the process.
The German thermal efficiency was very, very low.
It was around 30%. And we had increased the thermal
efficiency to an estimated 55% based on the heat
and the coal. And this probably was the best we
could conceive.
We worked with the Copper's Company in developing
a similar set of figures for fish troughs.
And then later on, the National Petroleum Council
wanted to enter into those studies, and we ran
cooperative studies. And all of these studies
came up with a no-go proposition as far as
Competitive prices were at that time.
My next question was going to be, or my original
question was going to be, why did the program come
to an end? Let me go on. That is one reason why it came
to an end. Economics. But there's another reason.
And The other reason has nothing to do with
synthetic fuel technology. And I think you know
what the other reason is. During the period of the
30s and 40s, and particularly after World War II,
there was a greatly increased exploratory effort
in the Middle East.
Although everybody knew there was a lot of oil in
the Middle East, I don't think anybody
appreciated how much oil and how cheaply oil could
be produced in the Middle East.
And Kuwait and Saudi Arabia and Iran
and the surrounding countries, many of them, were
found to be literally afloat on oil.
And reserves were built up by the 60s in the order of
hundreds of billions of barrels.
And oil costs in those countries were well below a
dollar a barrel.
And shipping costs to this country were less than a
dollar a barrel. So in any event, you were talking
about oil in this country that was only worth $2 a
barrel if it was competing with foreign oil, and
maybe $3 a barrel if it was competing with American
oil. Would you shut off the recording? Shut off,
right there. Okay, okay. Well, I think that, in
essence, brings us through. In an hour and a half,
we've brought you through pretty well a... Oh, but
I have some questions.
The plants, then, I take it, were disassembled.
The Louisiana, Missouri plant
ran, I think, through about 1953 or 1954.
And then I believe that Hercules Powder Company
bought the site back from the government or
acquired the site from the government. I believe
that plant was disassembled, both the fissure
trope and the coal hydrogenation. That's what I
thought. Now, I wonder what happened to the
records of those plants. Shouldn't they be filed
someplace?
I heard about
eight months ago a group of engineers from the
floor company were here
investigating not the history but the technology
of coal hydrogenation and fisheries operations.
And they told me that those records from those
plants had all been filed at Brewston and then
ultimately had been shipped to Morgantown, West
Virginia. but that they had gone to Morgantown,
West Virginia, and somebody down there
discovering all these files had not been in use for
years and years and years had destroyed the files.
That was shortly before they got there. So I don't
know. I don't know whether this is true or not, but
at least the Floor Corporation thought it was
true. What corporation was this, then? The Floor
Corporation. They're in Los Angeles,
California. Okay, that's F-L-O-O-R? F-L-U-O-R.
F-L-U-O-R. Yeah, they're well-known. That's a
big engineering company. They're building a fish
trough plant over for South Africa. Okay, right.
That's what I thought. I wanted to make sure I got
that. Now, isn't Kubi at Morgantown? Wayne Kuby,
also in Chemical Engineering. He certainly may
be, but the people I know, they're practically all
retired. Jim McGee and Sid Cattell and those
people are all retired. They're getting to my age,
and they're lazier than I am, I think.
Now, were there any studies, reprints? No. Did you
publish any studies from the plant's activities?
Oh, there's an enormous amount of publications.
Okay. Those, you see those books there. You should
have. Right. That's not one. Is this the annual
report? Those are the annual reports. That's what
comes out of those plants right there. And I think
they ran through 54 maybe or 55. So those are all
available. Okay. And then there were a lot of
journal articles published, and there were
separate—you ought to get—the Bureau of Mines has
a library in there. Whatever publication they've
ever put out, it was in the Department of Interior.
And if you can't find it in the Department of
Interior, I think they have a very complete
library still out here on the campus at their
college. You know, there's the Bureau of Mines
station out there. Here? I didn't know that. Yeah,
it's just up the hill from us, about half a mile, a
quarter of a mile. And they have a complete
library. But if you go down to the Department of
Interior, they have a complete, even a more
complete library. No short pictures of the plant
and everything else, no. Because we haven't, I
haven't seen any of these, no references to these.
You've never seen them? No, never. No, all that
work was well documented.
Okay, now it, now the Germans who came over and
assembled the plants, did they stay here or did
they return to Germany? A fair share of them stayed
here. Donath was with us at Louisiana, Missouri,
up through the days of the operation of the plant.
He left Louisiana, Missouri, and went with the
coppers company. He had two sons of both, I
believe, who graduated from MIT and did very well
in their schoolwork. Donath then retired and went
out to the Virgin Islands, St. Thomas, I believe.
And he may still be living, but I'm not absolutely
sure of that. Alberts, I believe, also joined
Blaunox, which later became Gravo Company. And I
believe Alberts is here, if he's still living. I
can't tell you all these things. And, uh, Hoobman,
uh, Hoobman, I believe, uh, went back to Germany.
He headed the Lurgy organization, uh, back in
Germany after he went back. I believe he's dead
now. I'm not sure of this. Uh, I have a little
problem. I don't know what happened to Pickler. I
really don't know any, uh, what happened to
Pickler. I have a slight historical problem with
the bring you over to the German war scientists. It
seems to me that, at least in disciplines other
than oil, in your field, in chemistry, Americans
were making plans to bring the German scientists
back as early as 1944. Is that not correct? No, I'm
sure they weren't. Because I think Operation
Paperclip, as it was called... Yeah, that's
what's right. Okay. I think those guys were
talking about which scientists they wanted and
which scientists they didn't want by the middle of
1944. Well, it may have been earlier than that. I
don't know. Okay. We brought them back... I would
say that most of them were on their way here in 545.
I'm
far from sure that we were the earliest team over
there, too. I'm sure that some of the explosive
teams and people like that were over there earlier
than we were. Quite frankly, that's what I thought
you were doing over there. When I saw explosives, I
thought you were there with heavy water. It would
make sense. No, no, we had nothing to do with that.
Okay, the...
Was there any informal or formal contact among the
members of TOM and the German scientists after the
plants were disassembled? I mean, just what I'm
trying to find out, and the question is poorly
phrased, does the issue of synthetic oil just
simply drop off the board, so to speak? No, when we
came back, we had...
Oh, I would say three or four or five meetings of not
necessarily, certainly not all of the team, but
various sections of the team came to meetings in
Washington and so on and so forth. And these were
meetings that Miller was very active in, and
getting the reports organized and getting a
spotlight.
But I'd say within a year after we got back, the
thing was pretty well, in a sense. Was it because
President Truman had done away with the Petroleum
Administration for War? the war administration
for petroleum, or was it the fact perhaps that
people were no longer interested in secrets and
documents and... I think the latter. I see. I
think... But this is a wartime activity. I think
industry
had now had available most of the information they
wanted about the German technology. Good. And...
That's better, isn't it? Yes, I think maybe it'll
pick it up slightly better. I mean, it'll take a hum
out of it. And as far as we in the Bureau of Mines are
concerned, we had gathered most information we
wanted about their synthetic fuel work and about
their fissure trucks work and had used it in our
plants and our laboratories. And so I think it just
naturally tapered off rather. Plus the fact that
it wasn't proven to be economical at the moment. It
wasn't proving to be economical, we see what we
see. And now, may I go on just to... Sure, we will.
The only reason we're questioning is some things
we won't put in right here in the story. This...
After the price of oil began to rise, I would say in
the middle and late 60s,
we sensed again that it was probable that the world
as a whole was going to be interested in converting
coal to fuels.
And I think everybody thought that by the time oil
reached $8 to $9 a barrel, that then synthetic fuel
plants would become an economic possibility.
Now, by we, do you mean the Bureau of Mines again?
Well, I think not only the Bureau of Mines. I left
the Bureau of Mines in 1953. That's what I thought.
And so this was not only the Bureau of Mines. I think
the Bureau of Mines had the same feeling But I
talked to oil people. At that time, I was a member of
a number of committees of the National Academy of
Science. And we had began to review these
processes. And I think both the oil people and the
Bureau of Mines and people like myself began to
feel, well, synthetic fuels was coming back into
the picture. But two things happened, which were I
guess it's fair to say, quite discouraging.
One
was that
while IRDA had spent a lot of money on
investigating the technology,
and this had been over a period of four or five
years, We didn't have any material breakthrough
in the technology.
We were still following the German patterns in
both the coal hydrogenation work and the
Fischer-Trumpsch work. And without a material
breakthrough, we still faced a highly complex and
costly plan.
And the next thing that began to happen is that
there were enormous inflation of construction
costs. And then the third thing that began to
happen is there was an enormous inflation in coal
costs. So when you ultimately got through, you
faced the fact that even though we knew better
catalysts, and even though we knew that we could
operate at lower pressures, and even though we had
cut the retention times to a minor extent, we still
faced oil that was probably, at the minimum, $20 a
barrel, and probably might easily go to $30 a
barrel. And this was in face of the fact that we are
now importing oil at $12 or $14 a barrel, and we were
still behind the economic eight ball.